# Understanding the impact of county-level policies on primary and secondary school openings on adult mobility during the COVID-19 pandemic 
Carol Liu, Katie Campbell, Ani Deshpande, Sanjana Pampati  
## Introduction
Since March 2020, several primary and secondary schools in the United States experienced disruptions in delivery of standard in-person instruction to curb transmission of the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus. The primary rationale for school closures is to limit child-to-child and child-to-school-staff contacts, which may contribute to COVID-19 spread within schools and secondary spread to households. Another widely mentioned rationale for school closures is resuming in-person schooling may lead to “spillover effects” on adult behavior, specifically, mobility, such that adults may be more likely to go to work in-person or engage in recreational activities if schools are open, which, in turn, may also contribute to increased transmission levels of COVID-19 in the general community. However, this hypothesis has not been empirically evaluated and it is uncertain whether school re-opening policies do affect adult mobility in a meaningful way. Accordingly, we conducted an analysis of county-level mobility data in the US to approximate the causal effect that school closures may have on adult mobility. Specifically, we aimed to answer the question: does re-opening schools for in-person learning increase adult mobility to non-essential places among counties in the US that implemented any in-person learning after the summer compared to counties who were virtual-only during the first four weeks of the Fall 2020 semester?

## Methods
### Data
Data on school district instruction policies for the Fall 2020 semester was obtained from MCH Strategic Data's publicly-available "COVID-19 School District Data" which was aggregated to counties using the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) database. The outcome of adult mobility was assessed using SafeGraph. SafeGraph aggregates geolocation data from smart phones and provides metrics on time spent and number of visits to points-of-interest per week, disaggregated by the home census block of smart phone devices. Data were weighted by the sampling ratio of devices in the home census block group to population of the home census block group. As such, we can estimate the total number of visits made by devices residing in a specific census block to a specific point of interest (POI). We further consider county-level covariates that summarize measures of vulnerability using the COVID-19 Community Vulnerability Index (CCVI). 

### Analysis
The average effect on visits to non-essential points of interest (POI) due to school re-opening in the Fall 2020 Semester is enacted by implementing a difference-in-differences design (DD). Our baseline outcome is average weekly visits to non-essential POIs over four weeks before school start in the fall, whereas the end line outcome is average weekly visits to non-essential POIs over four weeks post-start of the Fall 2020 semester. To estimate the difference-in-difference measure, we fit a generalized-linear-model with a Poisson likelihood and log link function with the following formula:

log(Visits) = B_0 + B_1Time + B_2SchoolStatus + B_3Time*SchoolStatus + B_4Covariates + e

We utilized g-computation methods with the DD approach to estimate the Average Treatment Effect in the Treated (ATT). We used regression coefficients from our fitted model to predict counterfactual outcomes where all subjects are at end line and treated (M11), at end line and untreated (M01), baseline and treated (M10) and finally baseline and untreated (M00). We used these predictions to estimate the causal parameter with the following estimarow:

Difference in Difference = M11 - M01- M10 + M00

## Results
The mean incidence rate of adult visits to non-essential places per capita is *0.0268 (95% CI: 0.201, 0.337)* lower in Fall compared to the summer in the virtual group. The mean the incidence rate of per capita visits was higher in counties that had in-person schooling by 0.131 (-0.051, 0.212) at baseline. There was an excess reduction in mobility by Fall in counties with in-person schooling of 0.012 (0.003, 0.023) visits per capita.

### Discussion
Overall, the data suggests that mobility decreased, on average, among all the counties included in the analysis from the summer compared to the start of the school year. We found that the average treatment effect of establishing in-person learning compared to all virtual learning resulted a greater reduction in adult mobility by county. Findings relating to school closures and COVID-19 transmission dynamics have been mixed, as some studies suggested that school reopening did not increase community transmission of COVID-19, while others found no impact of school reopening on community transmission. One potential mechanism through which school reopening can impact community COVID-19 transmission dynamics is through effects on adult mobility. However, our study did not provide evidence of this hypothesis. In fact, these findings suggest that in-person learning policies were associated with a decrease in adult mobility. 
